Translator: Parvathi Pappu
Reviewer: Rhonda Jacobs
If we still lived as hunters and gatherers
on wild plums and animals alone,
then there would be only
about 25 million people on earth today.
Now the population is over seven billion,
which is due to a change in our way
of life from over 10,000 years ago.
Some of your and my ancestors
saw the potential
in certain wild plants and animals
and started domesticating them.
This happened through
continuous cultivation
and selection of those plants
with a special capacity -
only a small part of wild plants
and animals can be domesticated at all.
Let's have a look
at this plant, for example.
Isn't it amazing
that out of this wild cabbage,
kale, cauliflower and all the other
cabbage varieties were developed?
This development into a culture plant
did, of course, not happen overnight
but took thousands of years,
and it took several hundreds
of generations of humans.
That's why they are
a real cultural heritage,
just like the Eiffel Tower
or a Van Gogh painting.
So, maybe the next time
you bite into a cauliflower,
be aware that you're eating
a kind of Mona Lisa.
(Laughter)
Through domestication process,
a huge diversity arose.
For almost every part of the world,
species and varieties that fit
the special conditions were found.
In Switzerland, for example,
there were distinct varieties
in almost every village,
like the Küttiger carrot
or the Uster apple.
I like to watch the reactions of people
at exhibitions of traditional varieties.
It is clearly split by age.
Older the people say,
'Oh, I remember this variety
from my grandmother's garden.'
And younger people, they are just amazed
and say, 'I didn't know
there were so many different ones',
and then they take out their phone
and take a picture.
(Laughter)
But apart from being a cultural heritage
or simply being beautiful,
do we really need this much diversity?
Would not one single variety
of each crop be enough?
What happens if a population depends
too much on a single variety
was highlighted in Ireland
in the mid 19th century.
The Irish were mostly cultivating
a potato variety called the Lumper.
Potatoes of the same variety are clones
and thus genetically identical.
So when a new disease arrived
with the potato blight,
it had a very easy game,
and it destroyed the crops
in consecutive years.
The sad consequence was
that about a million people died,
and one and a half million Irish
had to emigrate.
We can see from this that nature
does not agree with monocultures,
as they can be easily wiped out
by a single disease.
The natives in South America, for example,
do not grow only one single potato variety
but many, many different ones.
Like this, they always have a yield,
as the varieties differ in their reaction
to pests and drier or wetter years.
A more current example to show
that monocultures are only short living
is the banana.
It may well be that in a few years,
you will not be able to eat one anymore.
The trade relies to 95 percent
on a single variety
which is grown on large plantations.
These are now threatened
by the Panama disease.
There is no other variety
to replace it at the moment.
And to make my point
for diversity very clear,
let's look at it from
a completely different angle.
If you were so lucky to be a millionaire,
you would not put all your money
on the same stock,
but you would diversify
because the risk
of losing everything is too big.
But, in agriculture,
instead of diversifying
and minimising the risk,
what we are doing is the exact opposite.
And this funnel represents
the concentration which is taking place
at every level.
Firstly, it represents the people
working in agriculture.
At the beginning of the 20th century,
it was 60 percent of the population.
Now, it is down to three percent.
And it stands for the seed companies.
In 1970, there were 7,000 companies,
and none had a market share of over 0.5%.
Now, the top five
hold 60 percent of the market.
And it stands for
the huge loss in diversity.
In the last 150 years,
we lost 75 percent of all varieties
ever selected by humans.
They have gone forever.
One reason for this huge loss
is the industrialisation of every culture
and with it the appearance
of modern hybrid seeds.
For farmers and gardeners,
hybrid seeds are a dead end
because they do not stay true to type
when you take the seeds.
You have to buy them every year,
and thus, they are an extremely
good business model,
as you have to rely on the companies.
Traditional varieties, on the other hand,
can be regrown by everybody
who wants to, year after year,
by saving your own seeds.
With traditional varieties,
many ways are possible,
and this is what makes them powerful.
They can be the base for a more
sustainable agricultural future.
We do not know what challenges lie ahead
and what new traits will be necessary,
but the more diversity
we can safeguard now,
the better the chances are
that we will have the suitable varieties
at hand for the future.
And that is why I would like
this funnel to be reversed again.
With urban gardening and farming
and community supported agriculture,
reversing this process
has already started.
And that is why we
from the ProSpecieRara Foundation
try to save as many different
traditional varieties as possible.
At the moment we're safeguarding
1,600 different vegetable varieties
in our seed library here in Basel,
and the number is still growing.
We think it's important
to sow the seeds every year
so that they can adapt
to changing environment.
We would need a very large garden
to be able to do so,
but fortunately, we have the help
of over 500 volunteers
who grow the varieties in their own garden
and then send the saved seeds back to us.
Without them, our work and that
of other seed saving organisations
would not be possible.
You can also be part
in reversing this process.
To be honest, seed saving
is quite difficult with most crops,
but some are rather easy.
Tomatoes, for example, are very simple
and very rewarding.
Have you ever eaten a sun-ripe tomato
fresh from the plant?
The taste of it excels
that of the supermarket type by far.
And instead of eating
only red and round ones,
you can choose from a huge variety
in color, shape and size.
I'm sure you would find one
that suits you.
All you need is a sunny spot
on your balcony
or in front of your house,
a pot, earth and water.
When a tomato is ripe,
the seeds are ripe as well.
So if you want to get the seeds
from a very good variety,
you just put the seeds in a glass
and let them sit for one or two days.
Then you rinse them and let them dry.
As nature is abundant,
you will get a large amount of seeds,
which you can share
with your friends and family
and resow next spring.
By sowing and sharing them,
you will keep a link alive
to what your and my ancestors
have been doing for thousands of years,
and bring it into the future.
I hope you will give it a try.
Thank you.
(Applause)